---
layout: post
title: "WPF in 2020: .NET GUI Framework Survey"
date: 2020-07-10 20:27:00
description: Discussion of where WPF fits in the 2020 C# UI landscape
tags:
 - C#
 - WPF
---

So it is 2020 and presumably you are a newcomer to C# confused by the myriad of GUI options available to you in the quickly changing .NET ecosystem. Before diving into WPF in future articles, this article will examine the pros and cons of the most viable GUI frameworks and where they work so you can determine if WPF is viable for your project. Finally, I will address the shakeup that Microsoft introduced in Build 2020.

I will separate GUI frameworks into three categories: Codegen-based, XAML-based, and Web-based.

# Code Generation Frameworks

## Windows Forms
Most newcomers and many college-level C# GUI courses choose this framework when getting started and that is a mistake. While WinForms has the best drag-and-drop GUI editor of all major .NET GUI frameworks, it also has the worst out-of-the-box controls and extensibility. Introduced in 2002, WinForms is an extensive wrapper around Win32API. Changing behavior or customize appearance beyond the standard offerings often requires specific Win32API knowledge to change behavior or customize appearance, dealing with flickering issues, or even redrawing the entire control from scratch. Then you may also need to write additional code to support your customization in the WinForms Designer if you want correct visualization in the Designer.

### Compatibility
.NET Framework and .NET Core 3+
Windows Desktop
Cross-platform with many caveats via Mono

### Pros
Easiest start

### Cons
Very difficult to customize
Data binding is limited and awkward
Encourages code coupling leading to poor testability and poor maintainability
Poor transparency support and flickering

### Verdict
There is only one case where using WinForms is viable: 1. You don't care about UI appearance or behavior beyond the limited WinForms controls and 2. You do not have time to go through the learning curve of a better UI framework. I like to say that WinForms makes the first 20% of an application very easy and the last 80% very hard. You'll find yourself 

# XAML Frameworks
These frameworks use an XML-based language called Extensible Application Markup Languages (XAML) to define the view. User interfaces are inherently hierarchical with many parent-child relationships so XAML is a good fit to define the UI as opposed to code generation which is much more flat. Furthermore, XAML allows easy runtime generation of collections of controls through data templates and data binding. Most XAML frameworks have support for Hot Reload which allows you to launch the application via your IDE, edit XAML, and see updates live as your app is running. These features and more have made XAML the mainstay of most .NET GUI offerings.

Many developers pair XAML Frameworks with MVVM (Model-View-ViewModel) architecture. This architecture allows the ViewModel, a C# class that contains data to display and commands to execute, to be separated from the XAML-based View which contains the UI hierarchy and styling. With care, these ViewModels can be portable to other XAML-based frameworks and are unit testable. One common practice is to target desktop with a WPF or UWP project and target mobile with a Xamarin project while using the same ViewModel.

## Windows Presentation Foundation
WPF was released in late 2006 and Microsoft learned from many flaws within WinForms. First, WPF detaches from Win32API and is built from the ground up using Direct3D. Second, WPF introduced XAML which is a markup language performing a similar role as HTML in isolating view code. Last, good data binding and data templates were introduced to eliminate a lot of glue code.

### Compatibility
.NET Framework and .NET Core 3+
Windows Desktop only

### Pros
Mature ecosystem with many articles and StackOverflow posts
Excellent community libraries
Flexible customization

### Cons
Restricted to Windows Desktop
WPF Designer is a trap and not worth using
Steep learning curve with pitfalls

### Verdict
WPF is a mature, flexible GUI framework that is still good for developing Windows Desktop apps today. There is no uncertainty about the future since WPF is deep into maintenance mode with only bug fixes and minor updates. The default styling may look a bit dated, but excellent styling libraries created by the community have helped modernize its look.

## Universal Windows Platform
UWP for Windows 10 is Microsoft's successor to WPF. Initially stumbling with its identity and Microsoft's failed push at Windows 10 Phone, UWP did not capture the Windows developer scene despite its improved offerings in features. Like WPF, it also uses XAML for designing views.

### Compatibility
.NET Framework and .NET Core 3+
Windows 10 (Desktop, Phone, XBox One, HoloLens, IoT)

### Pros
Improves upon WPF features with Compiled Bindings, XAML Islands, Input Gestures and more
Modern styling out-of-the-box
Simplest path to Microsoft Store

### Cons
Unclear future
Limited to Windows 10

### Verdict
UWP is, for the time being, the premiere Microsoft offering for Windows Desktop GUI.

## Avalonia
[Avalonia](http://avaloniaui.net/) is a more recent community-developed GUI framework. 

### Compatibility
.NET Framework 4.61+ and .NET Core 2+
Windows, Linux, and OSX Desktop

### Pros
Cross-Platform
Reasonably good docs for open source

### Cons
Mobile support still experimental
Lack of detailed articles and StackOverflow posts

### Verdict

## Xamarin Forms


### Compatibility

### Pros

### Cons

### Verdict

# Web Frameworks

# Abandoned Technologies
Silverlight and WebForms are no longer being maintained and should not be considered for use.